[docs] Add CI/CD tutorial (#44866)
expo/expo: docs/pages/tutorial/cicd/development-builds.mdx

---
title: 'EAS Workflows for development builds'
sidebar_title: Development builds
description: Learn how to automate development builds with EAS Workflows using fingerprint.
---

import { ContentSpotlight } from '~/ui/components/ContentSpotlight';
import { FingerprintFlow } from '~/ui/components/FlowDiagram/Diagrams/FingerprintFlow';
import { UnitTestGate } from '~/ui/components/FlowDiagram/Diagrams/UnitTestGate';
import { ProgressTracker } from '~/ui/components/ProgressTracker';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';

> Manually rebuilding a development client on every push to a GitHub repository can be slow. By the end of this chapter, we automate [development builds](/develop/development-builds/introduction/) for Android and iOS, use fingerprints to skip creating unnecessary builds, and run unit tests before any build starts.

Reviewer: I'd expand on this a bit more on _why_ you'd want to build a dev build on main every time, and how developers could download it (how do I know there's a dev build compatible with my current project - `eas build:dev` maybe)

      profile: development
  build_ios:
    name: Build iOS
    type: build
    params:
      platform: ios
      profile: development
```

We add two jobs: `build_android` and `build_ios`. Both are of type `build` with different parameters for platform and build profile.

The `params` key for each job includes:

- [`platform`](/eas/workflows/syntax/#params) sets the target OS for the build (`android` or `ios`)
- [`profile`](/build/eas-json/#build-profiles) specifies the build profile from our **eas.json**

</Step>

<Step label="2">

### Run the workflow manually

Let's run the workflow manually using the command:

<Terminal cmd={['$ eas workflow:run .eas/workflows/build.yml']} />

</Step>

<Step label="3">

### Verify on the EAS dashboard

On the EAS dashboard, notice that it says "Triggered manually" under the **Workflow graph** tab. Anytime the **Trigger** is set to **Manual**, it means the workflow was created using the `eas workflow:run` command.

<ContentSpotlight
  alt="Workflow running manually on EAS dashboard to create development builds for Android and iOS."
  src="/static/images/tutorial/cicd/development-builds-01.png"
  className="max-w-160"
/>

> Although the logs for each build are shown within the workflows interface, we can click the build ID (for example, `ef90d1f` is the Android build ID shown above) to view the EAS Build page.

Reviewer: General feedback but also applies to this line: in a lot of places where "we" is used it could be omitted, especially as our writing guide says we should prefer second person. What do you think?

Author: Sure, but our tutorials have this constraint to use first person voice. I can tighten the phrase in above and later look at tightening more places.

Author: If we want to move away from first person voice, we can also do that (I can follow up in other tutorials as well).

### Add a trigger and run the workflow

Let's add the `on.push` trigger to the workflow so it runs automatically on every push to `main`:

```yaml .eas/workflows/build.yml
name: Development builds

# @info #
on:
  push:
    branches: ['main']
# @end #

jobs:
  fingerprint:
    name: Fingerprint
    type: fingerprint
    environment: development
  get_android_build:
    name: Check for existing Android build
    needs: [fingerprint]
    type: get-build
    params:
      fingerprint_hash: ${{ needs.fingerprint.outputs.android_fingerprint_hash }}
      profile: development
  get_ios_build:
    name: Check for existing iOS build
    needs: [fingerprint]
    type: get-build
    params:
      fingerprint_hash: ${{ needs.fingerprint.outputs.ios_fingerprint_hash }}
      profile: development
  build_android:
    name: Build Android
    needs: [get_android_build]
    if: ${{ !needs.get_android_build.outputs.build_id }}
    type: build
    params:
      platform: android
      profile: development
  build_ios:
    name: Build iOS
    needs: [get_ios_build]
    if: ${{ !needs.get_ios_build.outputs.build_id }}
    type: build
    params:
      platform: ios
      profile: development
```

> Let's assume we made some TypeScript/JavaScript changes to our Expo project. After doing so, we can push a commit to the `main` branch to trigger the workflow from our GitHub repository:

Reviewer: Can we be more specific? Maybe explicitly call out we changed some styling or copy.

- `run: npx jest --ci` executes the test suite. The `run` key runs any shell command, similar to the `echo` command. The `--ci` flag tells Jest to run in CI mode, which skips watching for file changes and exits after running all tests.

Now, the `fingerprint` job has `needs: [run_tests]`, so it only runs after the tests pass. If tests fail, the rest of the workflow gets skipped.

</Step>

<Step label="2">

### Trigger the workflow

Commit and push the updated workflow along with the test file to `main`:

<Terminal
  cmd={[
    '$ git add .',
    '$ git commit -m "Add unit tests to development builds workflow"',
    '$ git push origin main',
  ]}
  cmdCopy="git add . && git commit -m 'Add unit tests to development builds workflow' && git push origin main"
/>

After triggering the workflow, open the EAS dashboard and notice the flow of the jobs inside our workflow.

<ContentSpotlight
  alt="Workflow running with fingerprint and get-build jobs skipping the build jobs since compatible builds already exist."

>   src="/static/images/tutorial/cicd/development-builds-03.png"

Reviewer: Should this be `development-builds-04.png`?

---
title: 'Automate development builds with EAS Workflows'
sidebar_title: Development builds
description: Learn how to automate Android and iOS development builds with EAS Workflows and use fingerprints to skip rebuilds when only JavaScript changes.
---

import { ContentSpotlight } from '~/ui/components/ContentSpotlight';
import { FingerprintFlow } from '~/ui/components/FlowDiagram/Diagrams/FingerprintFlow';
import { UnitTestGate } from '~/ui/components/FlowDiagram/Diagrams/UnitTestGate';
import { Prerequisites, Requirement } from '~/ui/components/Prerequisites';
import { ProgressTracker } from '~/ui/components/ProgressTracker';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';

Manually rebuilding a development client on every push to a GitHub repository can be slow. Team members or new contributors who pull native changes (a new module, a new permission, an SDK upgrade) wait for a fresh build before they can run the project.

> Automating dev builds on the `main` branch keeps a current build ready to install. Developers can run `eas build:dev` to install the latest compatible build. If the project fingerprint matches an existing EAS Build, that build is downloaded instead of a new one being created.

Author: **[nit]** 'dev builds' is informal — the rest of the page (title, learning outcomes, frontmatter description) consistently uses 'development builds' (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#word-usage`). The command name `eas build:dev` stays as-is.

```suggestion
Automating development builds on the `main` branch keeps a current build ready to install. Developers can run `eas build:dev` to install the latest compatible build. If the project fingerprint matches an existing EAS Build, that build is downloaded instead of a new one being created.
```

> Automating development builds on the `main` branch keeps a current build ready to install. Developers can run `eas build:dev` to install the latest compatible build. If the project fingerprint matches an existing EAS Build, EAS downloads that build instead of creating a new one.

Reviewer 2: Two small things here: "Developers can run" reads outside the tutorial's we/our voice, and "an existing EAS Build" mixes the service name with a build artifact:

```suggestion
Automating development builds on the `main` branch keeps a current build ready to install. We can run `eas build:dev` to install the latest compatible build. If the project fingerprint matches an existing build, EAS downloads that build instead of creating a new one.
```

> Automating development builds on the `main` branch keeps a current build ready to install. Developers can run `eas build:dev` to install the latest compatible build. If the project fingerprint matches an existing EAS Build, that build is downloaded instead of a new one being created.

Author: **[suggestion]** "that build is downloaded instead of a new one being created" is passive on both clauses (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`). Active voice names EAS as the actor.

```suggestion
Automating development builds on the `main` branch keeps a current build ready to install. Developers can run `eas build:dev` to install the latest compatible build. If the project fingerprint matches an existing EAS Build, EAS downloads that build instead of creating a new one.
```

## Learning outcomes

- Automate [development builds](/develop/development-builds/introduction/) for Android and iOS with the `build` job type
- Use `fingerprint` and `get-build` jobs to skip rebuilding when native code hasn't changed
- Add a custom unit testing job that gates the workflow on passing tests

<Prerequisites>

<Requirement title="EAS Build configured for development">

> EAS CLI prompts to generate credentials the first time we trigger a build for a profile. Trigger the development build manually for both Android and iOS so the credentials exist before the workflow runs using the command below:

Author: **[suggestion]** Second sentence is 26 words with a dangling `using the command below` that floats away from the verb it modifies (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`). Lead with the command lead-in.

```suggestion
EAS CLI prompts to generate credentials the first time we trigger a build for a profile. Trigger the development build manually for both Android and iOS so the credentials exist before the workflow runs:
```

<Terminal cmd={['$ eas build --profile development --platform all']} />

</Requirement>

</Prerequisites>

## The `build` job type for development builds

> The `build` job type is one of the [pre-packaged jobs](/tutorial/cicd/first-workflow/#types-of-jobs-in-eas-workflows) from EAS Workflows. Instead of defining each step of the build process, we use the `build` job type to run an EAS Build for Android and iOS. We only need to specify the parameters the build jobs require.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence is circular ("specify the parameters the jobs require" names no parameter), and Step 1 right below shows the concrete `platform`/`profile` params anyway. Suggest cutting it:

```suggestion
The `build` job type is one of the [pre-packaged jobs](/tutorial/cicd/first-workflow/#types-of-jobs-in-eas-workflows) from EAS Workflows. Instead of defining each step of the build process, we use the `build` job type to run an EAS Build for Android and iOS.
```

> The `build` job type is one of the [pre-packaged jobs](/tutorial/cicd/first-workflow/#types-of-jobs-in-eas-workflows) from EAS Workflows. We don't have to define each step of the build process and instead, using the `build` job type, we can run an EAS Build for both Android and iOS and define only the necessary parameters for the build jobs to execute.

Author: **[suggestion]** Second sentence chains four ideas with 'and' — split for readability (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`, 'one thought per sentence').

```suggestion
The `build` job type is one of the [pre-packaged jobs](/tutorial/cicd/first-workflow/#types-of-jobs-in-eas-workflows) from EAS Workflows. Instead of defining each step of the build process, we use the `build` job type to run an EAS Build for Android and iOS. We only need to specify the parameters the build jobs require.
```

> For this chapter, we use the `development` build profile from our **eas.json**. This profile is used during Expo app development.

Author: **[suggestion]** Passive voice (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`).

```suggestion
For this chapter, we use the `development` build profile from our **eas.json**. We use this profile during Expo app development.
```

> For this chapter, we are going to use the `development` build profile from our **eas.json**. This profile is used during Expo app development.

Author: **[nit]** Present tense; `going to use` is the future construction (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`).

```suggestion
For this chapter, we use the `development` build profile from our **eas.json**. This profile is used during Expo app development.
```

<Step label="1">

### Add a build.yml

Inside **.eas/workflows/**, add a new file called **build.yml**. It uses the `build` job type with `profile` and `platform` parameters to create development builds for Android and iOS.

Add the following code to the **build.yml** file:

```yaml .eas/workflows/build.yml
name: Development builds

jobs:
  build_android:
    name: Build Android
    type: build
    params:
      platform: android
      profile: development
  build_ios:
    name: Build iOS
    type: build
    params:
      platform: ios
      profile: development
```

We add two jobs: `build_android` and `build_ios`. Both are of type `build` with different parameters for platform and build profile.

The `params` key for each job includes:

- [`platform`](/eas/workflows/syntax/#params) sets the target OS for the build (`android` or `ios`)
- [`profile`](/build/eas-json/#build-profiles) specifies the build profile from our **eas.json**

</Step>

<Step label="2">

### Run the workflow manually

Let's run the workflow manually using the command:

<Terminal cmd={['$ eas workflow:run .eas/workflows/build.yml']} />

</Step>

<Step label="3">

### Verify on the EAS dashboard

> On the EAS dashboard, notice that it says "Triggered manually" under the **Workflow graph** tab. Any time the **Trigger** is set to **Manual**, the workflow was triggered using the `eas workflow:run` command.

Reviewer 2: The second sentence reads as a disjointed conditional, and "is set to" implies the user configures it (the dashboard just shows it):

```suggestion
On the EAS dashboard, notice that it says "Triggered manually" under the **Workflow graph** tab. Any time the **Trigger** shows **Manual**, that means the workflow was started with the `eas workflow:run` command.
```

> On the EAS dashboard, notice that it says "Triggered manually" under the **Workflow graph** tab. Anytime the **Trigger** is set to **Manual**, it means the workflow was created using the `eas workflow:run` command.

Author: **[suggestion]** Passive voice (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`).

```suggestion
On the EAS dashboard, notice that it says "Triggered manually" under the **Workflow graph** tab. Any time the **Trigger** is set to **Manual**, the workflow was triggered using the `eas workflow:run` command.
```

<ContentSpotlight
  alt="EAS Workflows dashboard showing a manually-triggered run that creates development builds for Android and iOS in parallel."
  src="/static/images/tutorial/cicd/eas-workflows-development-build-manual-run.png"
  className="max-w-160"
/>

> The logs for each build appear inside the workflow interface. Clicking the build ID (for example, `ef90d1f` is the Android build ID above) opens the EAS Build page.

Reviewer 2: The example build ID `ef90d1f` is unique to the run it was captured from - every reader's ID will differ, and it isn't findable in the screenshots, so readers may hunt for it. Suggest going generic:

```suggestion
The logs for each build appear inside the workflow interface. Click a build's ID to open its EAS Build page.
```

Related: it would help if the screenshot above highlighted/circled the build ID so readers can see where to click - flagging in case that's an easy image edit.

Author: Applied the generic wording. Skipping the screenshot annotation for now since we are not editing the captured images in this pass.

> Although the logs for each build are shown within the workflows interface, clicking the build ID (for example, `ef90d1f` is the Android build ID shown above) opens the EAS Build page.

Author: **[suggestion]** Long sentence (~28 words) with passive `are shown` and a parenthetical interruption (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`). Consider splitting.

```suggestion
The logs for each build appear inside the workflow interface. Clicking the build ID (for example, `ef90d1f` is the Android build ID above) opens the EAS Build page.
```

<ContentSpotlight
  alt="EAS Build details page for an Android development build, showing the build status, fingerprint hash, commit SHA, and expanded log output."
  src="/static/images/tutorial/cicd/eas-build-android-development-build-logs.png"
  className="max-w-160"
/>

> **important** Jobs without dependencies run in parallel by default in EAS Workflows. In the above workflow, since both `build_android` and `build_ios` jobs don't have any dependencies, they start at the same time.

> Wait for both builds to complete before moving to the next step. After the builds are completed, we can use the **Install** or **Open with [Orbit](/build/orbit/)** buttons, or download from **Artifacts** to install on our device/emulator/simulator.

Author: **[suggestion]** Passive voice (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`).

```suggestion
Wait for both builds to complete before moving to the next step. Once they complete, we can use the **Install** or **Open with [Orbit](/build/orbit/)** buttons, or download from **Artifacts** to install on our device/emulator/simulator.
```

</Step>

## Skip unnecessary builds with fingerprints

> When our project has only TypeScript/JavaScript changes, we do not need a new development build. The existing build is still compatible. Our team pulls the latest from the `main` branch, runs `npx expo start`, and the development server delivers the JS changes to the build on their device or emulator/simulator.

Reviewer 2: The first two sentences say the same thing twice, and the third is a tangent into the local dev loop that also reappears later in the chapter. Suggest tightening to one line (the next paragraph's fingerprint explanation carries the rest):

```suggestion
When our project has only TypeScript/JavaScript changes, the existing development build is still compatible, so we do not need a new one.
```

> [**Expo Fingerprint**](/versions/latest/sdk/fingerprint/) automates this decision. It hashes the project's native characteristics (dependencies, native project files, configuration). If the hash matches an existing build, native code has not changed and EAS skips the rebuild. If the hash is different, native code changed and EAS creates a new build.

Author: **[suggestion]** Two 'If X, Y and Z' sentences without the comma before 'and' read as one continuous clause; add the comma so the result clause is clearly separated from the condition (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#punctuation`).

```suggestion
[**Expo Fingerprint**](/versions/latest/sdk/fingerprint/) automates this decision. It hashes the project's native characteristics (dependencies, native project files, configuration). If the hash matches an existing build, native code has not changed, and EAS skips the rebuild. If the hash is different, native code changed, and EAS creates a new build.
```

<FingerprintFlow />

Let's update **build.yml** step by step to detect native changes and build only when needed.

<Step label="1">

### Add a fingerprint job

The [`fingerprint`](/eas/workflows/pre-packaged-jobs/#fingerprint) pre-packaged job hashes the project's native characteristics and outputs a fingerprint hash for each platform. The `environment` field tells EAS which [environment variable configuration](/eas/environment-variables/) to use. Note that `environment` and `profile` can share the same name but refer to different things. `profile` points to a build profile in **eas.json** (how to build). `environment` points to environment variables configured on EAS (which values to inject at build time).

Update **build.yml** to add the `fingerprint` job before the build jobs:

```yaml .eas/workflows/build.yml
name: Development builds

jobs:
  # @info #
  fingerprint:
    name: Fingerprint
    type: fingerprint
    environment: development
  # @end #
  build_android:
    # ...
  build_ios:
    # ...
```

> The `fingerprint` job produces two outputs: `android_fingerprint_hash` and `ios_fingerprint_hash`. We will use these hashes in the next step to check if a compatible build already exists.

Author: **[nit]** Present tense (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`).

```suggestion
The `fingerprint` job produces two outputs: `android_fingerprint_hash` and `ios_fingerprint_hash`. We use these hashes in the next step to check if a compatible build already exists.
```

      profile: development
  build_ios:
    name: Build iOS
    needs: [get_ios_build]
    if: ${{ !needs.get_ios_build.outputs.build_id }}
    type: build
    params:
      platform: ios
      profile: development
```

Let's assume we made some TypeScript/JavaScript changes to our Expo project, like changing a button's color or updating the text on a screen. After doing so, we can push a commit to the `main` branch to trigger the workflow from our GitHub repository:

<Terminal
  cmd={[
    '$ git add .',
    '$ git commit -m "Update button label and tweak styling"',
    '$ git push origin main',
  ]}
  cmdCopy="git add . && git commit -m 'Update button label and tweak styling' && git push origin main"
/>

This triggers a new workflow that completes in seconds. On the EAS dashboard, both Android and iOS builds are skipped because a matching build already exists from the previous section.

<ContentSpotlight
  alt="EAS Workflows run where the fingerprint and get-build jobs skip the Android and iOS build jobs because compatible existing builds were found."
  src="/static/images/tutorial/cicd/eas-workflows-fingerprint-skips-existing-build.png"
  className="max-w-160"
/>

> Our team pulls the latest from the `main` branch and runs `npx expo start`. The existing development build picks up the JS changes.

Reviewer 2: "Our team pulls..." assumes the reader has a team, but this works the same for a solo developer. The inclusive "we" covers both:

```suggestion
We pull the latest from `main` and run `npx expo start`. The existing development build picks up the JS changes.
```

</Step>

## Custom jobs for unit testing

> **info** This section assumes Jest is set up in the project. For setup instructions, see [Unit testing with Jest](/develop/unit-testing/).

When working in a team, we want every change pushed to the `main` branch to pass tests before triggering a new build.

> Without automation, our team has to remember to run tests locally before pushing to `main`. If they forget and the code has a failing test, the next workflow can create a build from broken code.

Reviewer 2: "our team has to remember... if they forget" flips from first person to third person for the same people. Since the section already frames this as "When working in a team", "the team" agrees with "they":

```suggestion
Without automation, the team has to remember to run tests locally before pushing to `main`. If they forget and the code has a failing test, the next workflow can create a build from broken code.
```

> Without automation, our team will have to remember to run tests locally before pushing to `main`. If they forget and the code has a failing test, the next workflow can create a build from broken code.

Author: **[nit]** Present tense (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`).

```suggestion
Without automation, our team has to remember to run tests locally before pushing to `main`. If they forget and the code has a failing test, the next workflow can create a build from broken code.
```

With **EAS Workflows**, we can automate this process by mixing a custom job with our existing pre-packaged jobs. This custom job runs before fingerprint and build jobs. If a test fails, EAS stops the workflow and creates no build.

<UnitTestGate />

<Step label="1">

### Add a custom job for unit tests

> Let's add a custom job that runs unit tests before the builds start in our **build.yml** workflow file:

Author: **[suggestion]** Misplaced modifier — 'before the builds start in our **build.yml** workflow file' reads as if the builds start inside the file. The 'in our build.yml' actually scopes where we add the job (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`).

```suggestion
In our **build.yml** workflow file, let's add a custom job that runs unit tests before the builds start:
```

```yaml .eas/workflows/build.yml
name: Development builds

on:
  push:
    branches: ['main']

jobs:
  # @info #
  run_tests:
    name: Run unit tests
    steps:

>       - uses: eas/checkout

Reviewer 2: A short comment here helps code-first skimmers - `uses` is new in this example:

```suggestion
      - uses: eas/checkout # Check out the repo
```

      - uses: eas/install_node_modules
      - run: npx jest --ci
  # @end #
  fingerprint:
    name: Fingerprint
    # @info Add this to the fingerprint job. #

>     needs: [run_tests]

Reviewer 2: Same idea here - the gate is the point of this example, worth stating inline:

```suggestion
    needs: [run_tests] # Runs only after tests pass; if they fail, nothing builds
```

Author: Added the gate explanation by folding it into the existing highlight annotation on the needs line ("Add this to the fingerprint job. It runs only after tests pass; if tests fail, nothing builds.") so the line is not double-captioned by both an annotation and a trailing comment. The checkout comment from your other note is applied as is.

    # @end #
    type: fingerprint
    environment: development
  get_android_build:
    # ...
  get_ios_build:
    # ...
  build_android:
    # ...
  build_ios:
    # ...
```

The custom `run_tests` job does the following:

- `uses: eas/checkout` checks out the project source files from the GitHub repository. Custom jobs run on a new virtual machine, so the code is not available by default. This step is required before accessing any project files.
- `uses: eas/install_node_modules` installs dependencies using the package manager detected in the project (bun, npm, pnpm, or Yarn). This is needed before running any commands that depend on packages from **node_modules**, like Jest.
- `run: npx jest --ci` executes the test suite. The `run` key runs any shell command, similar to the `echo` command. The `--ci` flag tells Jest to run in CI mode, which skips watching for file changes and exits after running all tests.

> Now, the `fingerprint` job has `needs: [run_tests]`, so it only runs after the tests pass. If tests fail, the rest of the workflow gets skipped.

Author: **[suggestion]** Passive voice (`expo-docs-style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`).

```suggestion
Now, the `fingerprint` job has `needs: [run_tests]`, so it only runs after the tests pass. If tests fail, EAS skips the rest of the workflow.
```
